Smarter Governance – Getting Knowledge In“Many hands make light work. Many hands together make merry work.”Jeremy Bentham“No matter who you are, most of the smartest people work for someone else,” Bill Joy (Sun Microsystems)

IntroductionOpening an organization to the use of what Harvard Business School professor Henry W. Chesbrough calls “purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge” is well known in the business literature as a driver of innovation.1 This “open innovation” paradigm is the “antithesis of the traditional vertical integration model where internal [research and development] activities lead to internally developed products that are then distributed by the firm.”2 In many (but by no means all) businesses, the traditional assumption that working in secrecy leads to innovation is becoming obsolete.3 In the contemporary environment businesses are finding expertise in every corner of their organizations and outside of them.4 Open innovation not only expands opportunities for new solutions based on previously unavailable or disconnected silos of knowledge, but also allows external actors the benefits of leveraging an institution’s resources, such as its investment in research and development.5 The narrative of a lone entrepreneur bringing his or her innovation to the market has been replaced with the concept of networks and communities coming together in an interactive process of discovery.6 New businesses are thriving by supplying expertise to organizations such as banks looking to inform their investment decisions7 or law firms seeking expert witnesses.8 Relying exclusively on internal research and development is seen as limiting the potential scope of innovation in many sectors.      People learn things from the people to whom they have access.9 Government professionals possess tremendous experience, but they often lack frequent contact with academic, industry and entrepreneurial innovators. There is no reason to think that people who have worked inside a bureaucracy for a long time will have access to all the best know-how. Getting better expertise in from outside can improve how the public sector solves problems by bringing new ideas, perspectives and insights to bear. Government officials would also benefit from hearing new voices such as women, young people, people from other cultures and communities and those outside traditional Beltway spheres of influence.10        With fewer than 2,000 people formally employed by the Executive Office of the President11 and a few hundred in the West Wing, policy professionals in the White House, like those in federal agencies and Congress, are blocked by legal and time constraints from soliciting outside expertise. But their limited time and resources are a major reason to seek outside help and input. Open innovation is as vital for public as private institutions. Neither can innovate well in isolation.       Today we participate explicitly in the lives of our democracy by voting once a year at best and implicitly by volunteering at our local schools or hospitals. We also respond to the occasional poll. In contrast, thousands of people write articles on Wikipedia, many more upload hotel reviews on Tripadvisor, restaurant reviews on Yelp and book recommendations on Goodreads. They willingly participate in hard and specialized projects such as transcribing the works of Jeremy Bentham12 or ancient Egyptian papyri.13 Yet there is no clear path or common practice for citizens to share their know-how with government, even though many people would probably volunteer to do so.  We have no systemic way to engage the expertise, experience, and passion of people who want to help solve public problems – whether they are as momentous as the prospect of a flu pandemic, the threat of climate change, or public health and education, or as immediate as improving trash collection or building bicycle lanes.        It is only in recent years that those with technical ability – geeky citizens – have played a role in governance. All over the world, governments are opening up the data they collect, such as subway and bus schedules, and then inviting tech-savvy citizens – civic coders – to create smartphone apps that tell commuters when their bus or train is coming. There’s obvious value to the public as well as to institutions from having better data to inform planning, policymaking and the expenditure of resources. But what’s exciting about mashathons, hackathons, data dives and datapaloozas is that these are intelligible models for taking action. Wikipedia works because we know what tasks are required of us to write an encyclopedia entry. Only the high priesthood of government professionals knows how to write a law, craft a policy, draft procurement RFPs, or appropriate funds. Hackathons are a very limited model for engaging only a fraction of citizens but they showcase the under-utilized opportunity to ask people what they know and what they can do.14       There has been only limited progress toward developing approaches to engagement that lead to actionable help from outside. Crowdsourcing has been seen as a vehicle for amateur participation rather than a way to engage those with deep expertise and wide experience. But there is an emerging realization that people have and, more importantly, that they will share expert knowledge if asked.15 In How Do They Know, a 2012 report on the information needs of Congress, Lorelei Kelly explains the desperate urgency for legislators to have information curators who can identify innovative ideas, sort fact from fiction, and transform the glut of information into useful, independent knowledge for decision-making on an ongoing basis. Experts serve this curatorial function of filtering the reliable, specific and useful – narrowly tailoring – information for decision-making.  If we believe that governments have to design ways of getting in expertise that transforms information into knowledge relevant for decision-making, we have to be able to identify who knows what and what kind of experts provide the most reliable and relevant contributions in response to different kinds of problems and questions.
      Expert Networking, Crowdsourcing Expertise and Prize-Backed Challenges       Advances in science and technology have provided new tools – expert discovery and networking tools – for identifying who knows what and targeting requests to participate to those most likely to contribute. With the ability to identify and target engagement to a small number of relevant audiences such as urban planners, transportation engineers, cyclists, and cab drivers and to offer them ways to participate meaningfully, a city improves the chances of crafting a bike plan that is better suited to the material reality Technology can help to identify who knows what and to ask questions that elicit information relevant to decision-making. Crowdsourcing platforms simplify the process of asking and answering questions.      Prizes help create the incentive for insightful enthusiasts to emerge from the woodwork. A large body of social science research has studied the best ways to motivate skilled contributors by posing a challenge backed by a cash or reputational prize to a large number of potential solvers.16 The use of prizes in the public sector is growing more common, as evidenced by the evolution of, for example, the federal contest portal Challenge.gov and New York City’s BigApps challenge, but we still do not have a strong understanding of their optimal uses.
Example: Prize-Based Contests to Spur Innovation for the Air Force17

When the Air Force needed to solve the problem of how to halt an uncooperative vehicle at a checkpoint without hurting bystanders, it issued a 60-day challenge. (Police departments face the same challenge. Uzis work well in movies but not in real life.) One thousand people showed interest and one hundred submitted solutions. The winner was a 65 year old retired mechanical engineer from Lima, Peru who proposed a remote-controlled robotic vehicle that catches up to the fleeing vehicle and deploys an airbag underneath it, lifting it off the ground and bringing it to a stop. The Peruvian won $20,000 and the Air Force is developing a product that could save many lives. While expert networking platforms increase the number of needles in the haystack, prize-backed challenges depend upon having a big enough haystack and an enticing enough purse to coax out the needle. Without this kind of approach, “the chance of finding that person,” commented Alok Das, Senior Research Scientist at the Air Force Labs who ran the vehicle challenge, “is zero.”18 

Philosophical Background: Moving From What We Feel to What We KnowThere are very limited opportunities for the public to participate directly in governance. Rulemaking provides a narrow avenue through which to solicit expertise. Since World War II, the Federal Administrative Procedure Act of 1946 has required that agencies publish pending regulations for public comment only after they are drafted, establishing the public’s limited right to participate in administrative decision-making after the fact.  But the public is not involved in most stages of policymaking. Ex post comments on draft laws and regulations come too late and often in a form that is not useful to decision-makers.19        Advisory committees are the primary locus for providing technical expertise to agencies, but those are fraught with problems. On average, 1,000 advisory committees with more than 60,000 members “advise the President and the Executive Branch on such issues as the disposal of high-level nuclear waste, the depletion of atmospheric ozone, the national fight against Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), efforts to rid the Nation of illegal drugs, to improve schools, highways, and housing, and on other major programs.”20 Much has been written about the deficits of these committees, in particular regarding concerns about their political imbalance.21 A number of books and reports have criticized decisions made with the input of advisory committees populated by scientists employed by industry rather than academic institutions or public interest organizations.22  Even when they do not suffer from industry capture,23 advisory committees are slow to form, limited in the diversity of their membership and constrained by law and practice in what they can do. New forms of ideation and brainstorming are beginning to bring new voices and ideas into government, but these are still generally one-off processes that underestimate the difficulty of implementing a new idea while overestimating its efficacy.25      In Living the Policy Process, Philip Heymann deftly dissects the day-to-day decision-making practices of bureaucrats as they develop approaches to everything from regulating smoking to fighting wars. The book is unique in its anthropological approach to studying what civil servants do in detail and how political obligations and office politics influence how they decide. It shows how decision-making in government requires consulting with those to whom one is politically beholden in the same or the other party, weighing alternatives, finding the right moment to put a topic on the agenda, and engaging in the horse trading required to gain the necessary support. Engaging outside expertise, however, is a very limited part of the process.      The resistance to outside engagement is rooted in a philosophical distrust of participation by non-professionals and a belief that their role should be to ratify decisions made by others. In the Platonic ideal, knowledge is the key to successful governance, but it doesn’t come from citizens. Plato famously argued in The Republic that democracy was flawed because ordinary men in contrast to philosopher kings do not have the capacity to make judgments about the common good. In our modern model of government, the job of the people is to elect and the job of representatives and bureaucrats is to govern. Managers within government will make a show of consulting widely to lend their decisions political legitimacy, yet there is a widespread view that too much engagement and public input runs counter to good decision-making. There is a “price to be paid for wide consultation,” including conflict, disagreement, delay, and compromise.26 In the Weberian worldview, managers with fixed salaries and technical expertise exist to run complex societies, which due to their overwhelming scale and complexity render the classical idea of active democratic citizenship obsolete.27      Counter-intuitively, representative democracy arguably produces the conditions where people lack the capacity to participate well. Representative practices convene people artificially on the basis of their geographic status (voting) or their demographic diversity (deliberation). Polling and other ways to assess public opinion evolved as a check on the representative’s ability to reflect the public will accurately, but still kept the public removed from actual decision-making.      The drive to win elections in a representative, party-political system reinforces the dumbing down of political participation. Political parties want to poll voters’ opinions in order to be able to cater to those sentiments. The Republican Party tones down its anti-gay and anti-immigrant rhetoric in California and plays it up in Texas. The Democratic Party panders to labor in the big cities and to the tech industry in Silicon Valley. In an effort to find out how people feel, however, both parties are missing an opportunity to ask people what they know to improve how to solve problems and make decisions. In contrast, classicist Josh Ober has shown that in ancient Athens “democratic leadership was built on a model of the volunteer expert adviser, constantly seeking public attention and approval through direct communication with the citizenship, rather than on a model of the authoritative class of rulers who occasionally seek legitimation through elections.”28 Drawing on research on one thousand Greek city-states, he convincingly argues in Democracy and Knowledge that Athens’ participatory democratic approach to public knowledge management was in large measure responsible for its economic and military success relative to other poleis. The Athenian political system had institutions designed to aggregate knowledge for decision-making as opposed to merely assessing public preferences or interests. In Athens, Ober explains, engagement in decision-making was the must-have ingredient in the city-state’s unique historical success. The disenfranchisement of women and slaves prevented much potentially useful technical knowledge from coming to the fore, but even its limited form of engagement differentiated Athens from other states.29 The Value Proposition for Smarter GovernanceWhile current research consistently shows that bringing in new information can help institutions make better decisions, government does not need more information alone. It is a commonplace that all of us, including government officials, are drowning in the information tsunami.30 T. S. Eliot asked: “Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?” More information does not necessarily translate into better input. We now produce every two days more data than we created between the dawn of humanity and 2003.31 While enormous data inventories help us to model whole systems dynamically,32 equally important is harnessing the wisdom, know-how, experience and expertise of people who can identify, filter and align information to decision-making.So the potential benefits of Smarter Governance, while practically limitless, arise not from the availability of more information, but from the three characteristics of information that experts can bring to bear on government decision-making.1. Reliable InformationFor outside information to have a positive effect on government action, it must be reliable enough to serve as a basis for decision-making. Opening up governance to information from outside introduces concern about its quality. The Internet has no effective check on the proliferation of false information.33 Even worse, individual pieces of information can easily be distorted: New technologies for manipulating content allow users to edit their own digital text, pictures and sounds and, increasingly, to collaborate in the creation of cultural bricolage.34 When there is an overload of information that no one has the time to process, sort or organize effectively,35 reliable information is at a premium. However, the potential benefits that come from the intelligent use of reliable information outweigh the institution’s challenge of ensuring that reliability. Government agencies that use outside information will have to set their own standards for assessing information and information sources. For example, the Department of Education has a strict set of criteria for evaluating the literature upon which a new policy will be based to ensure that experts are filtering that information for reliability. This necessary step served the dual purpose of creating a safeguard against the use of faulty information and giving the department confidence that the outside information it draws in is reliable enough to serve as the basis for decision-making.2. Specific InformationThe increasing ability to tap individuals and small groups rather than the aggregated opinions huge swaths of the populous allows institutions to obtain outside information with a high level of specificity. Expertise often comes from direct, specific experience – knowledge of the conditions on the ground such as the topography of a landscape, the layout of buildings, the progression of a disease. Through the lens of local knowledge, experts translate raw information into something useful for decision-making. Experts include those who can do things, whether science or cycling or tiling floors, as well as those who possess what philosophers of expertise Harry Collins and Robert Evans call relational expertise. Relational experts are those who follow a field even if they don’t practice it, such as the science journalist, the cycling writer and the This Old House addict. Both kinds of “expert” – especially the relational expert, who can communicate about know how – have specific knowledge to share to inform how we make policy. In the aftermath of a disaster, for example, it is vital to be able to get information filtered by those who know the landscape.3. Information Aligned to the Problem at HandJust as Smarter Governance is not premised on the unchecked flow of information of all quality levels into institutions, decision-making will not be improved through an overload of information with varying degrees of relevance. A statement might be factually true, but if it isn’t relevant to the decision that needs to be made, or if it’s not available at the appropriate time and in a digestible form, then signal degrades into noise. Much attention in recent years on “smarter” institutions has focused on the use of passive data gathering from sensors, cellphones, and GPS-enabled devices to enable the collection of environmental, biometric, epidemiological, and other kinds of data from the built, natural and human environments.36 Without expert guidance, this kind of data would be overwhelming and impossible to use. But new initiatives on “urban informatics” or “predictive analytics” – such as NYU’s Center for Urban Science and Progress, Toronto’s Centre for Urban and Community Studies, and MIT’s SENSEable City Lab - all focus their research on specific, researchable problems. They’re learning how to collect, process and use big data from sensors to help cities govern better by, for example, pinpointing sources of noise and pollution, or modeling traffic and population patterns and then targeting the delivery of services more efficiently.37 Research Agenda on Smarter GovernanceThe current understanding of Smarter Governance includes two central ways to increase the amount of informed information brought into institutions: broadcast the opportunity to participate widely and use incentives, such as prizes, to increase the likelihood of relevant participation, or target the opportunity to participate narrowly and use expert discovery and networking techniques to reach those with a greater likelihood of participating well. The goal is to examine and compare different strategies for getting expertise in and develop a better understanding of what works and when:* How do we know who knows what and target requests to participate? (Identification)o How are the three paradigmatic techniques for identifying expertise - relationship, credentials, and reputation- being used, and how can they be used, within a co-creation context?* How do we match skills and expertise to problems? (Matching)o What can we learn from experiences in online search and advertising, academic discovery and other contexts regarding how to match people’s skills to work in different contexts and apply those lessons to governance?* What are the conditions and variables that determine the success rate of crowdsourcing expertise? (Conditions and Variables) * What incentives cause people to share their knowledge and expertise? (Motivation) o What are the extrinsic (including prizes) and intrinsic (such as altruism, autonomy, curiosity, empathy, etc.) motivations for participation, and how do they compare within the context of solving societal problems? * How do institutions utilize the inputs they receive? What absorptive capabilities must governmental institutions develop to assimilate the diverse knowledge of citizens? (Readiness and Integration) * What kinds of decision support will governmental leaders require to assimilate citizen knowledge? (Decision Tools and Support)	* What are the legal and cultural impediments to being open to expertise? (Challenges and Barriers)* What is the resulting impact on decision-making and people’s lives? (Impact) o Did getting in outside expertise translate into a “better” decision where better is understood as a more effective outcome?Notes1 Henry Chesbrough, “Open Innovation: A New Paradigm for Understanding Industrial Innovation,” in Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm, eds. H. Chesbrough and W. Vanhaverbeke and J. West, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).
2 Henry Chesbrough, “Open Innovation: A New Paradigm for Understanding Industrial Innovation,” in Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm, eds. H. Chesbrough and W. Vanhaverbeke and J. West, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).3 Henry Chesbrough, Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and profiting from technology, (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2003).4 David Weinberger, Too Big to Know: Rethinking Knowledge Now That the Facts Aren’t the Fact, Experts Are Everywhere, and the Smartest Person in the Room Is the Room, (New York: Basic Books, 2012).5 Linus Dahlander and David M. Gann, “How open is innovation?” Research Policy, vol. 29, no. 6 (July 2010): 699–709.6 Frank Piller, Christoph Ihl and Alexander Vossen, “A typology of customer co-creation in the innovation process,” available at SSRN, December 29, 2010, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1732127 7 See Dawn Cowie, “Noble launches expert network,” Financial News, February 10, 2009, http://www.efinancialnews.com/story/2009-02-10/noble-launches-expert-network?ea9c8a2de0ee111045601ab04d673622 8 See Andrew Lu, “When Should Attorneys Hire Expert Witnesses?” FindLaw, December 13, 2012, http://blogs.findlaw.com/strategist/2012/12/when-should-attorneys-hire-expert-witnesses.html 9 Anurag Acharya, “Integrating Discovery and Access for Scholarly Aritcles: Successes and Failures,” Presented at the Charleston Conference, 2012, http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/charleston/2012/Plenaries/2/ 10 “Memorandum to the Heads of Departments and Agencies: Next Steps in the Evidence and Innovation Agenda,” Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, July 26, 2013, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2013/m-13-17.pdf 11 The real numbers are larger and include those seconded by agencies to the White House but the total is still very small relative to the scope of activities. “Executive Office of the President Fiscal Year 2014 Congressional Budget Submission,” WhiteHouse.gov, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2014-eop-budget1_0.pdf 12 Tim Causer, “Welcome to Transcribe Bentham,” Transcibe Betham: A Participatory Initiative,” March 27, 2013, http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/ 13 “Ancient Lives Project,” Ancient Lives, accessed August 7, 2013, http://ancientlives.org/about 14 Beth Noveck, “Open Data – The Democratic Imperative,” Crooked Timber, July 5, 2012, http://crookedtimber.org/2012/07/05/open-data-the-democratic-imperative/ 15 See Clay Shirky, Cognitive Surplus: How Technology Makes Consumers into Collaborators, (New York, Penguin, 2011).16 See “‘And the winner is…’ Capturing the promise of philanthropic prizes,” McKinsey & Company, July 2009, http://mckinseyonsociety.com/downloads/reports/Social-Innovation/And_the_winner_is.pdf and Kevin C. Desouza, “Challenge.gov: Using Competitions and Awards to Spur Innovation,” IBM Center for The Business of Government Using Technology Series, 2012, http://www.businessofgovernment.org/sites/default/files/Challenge.gov_.pdf 17 “InnoCentive and the Air Force Research Lab Announce Successful Completion of Initial Open Innovation Challenges,” InnoCentive, October 17, 2011, http://www.innocentive.com/innocentive-and-air-force-research-lab-announce-successful-completion-initial-open-innovation-challe18 Case Foundation, “Collaborative Innovation: Dr. Alok Das and Jean Lupinacci,” YouTube, August 21, 2012, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dA3l_UlFZac19 Alice Lipowicz, “Use digital tools for better e-rulemaking, former official advises,” FCW, January 26, 2011, http://fcw.com/articles/2011/01/26/former-white-house-deputy-cto-advises-immediate-actions-for-improved-erulemaking.aspx 20 “The Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) Brochure,” GSA.gov, http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/101010 21 See Robin M. Nazzaro, “Issues Related to the Independence and Balance of Advisory Committees,” Highlights of Testimony before the Subcommittee on Information Policy, Census, and National Archives, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, House of Representatives, April 2, 2008, http://www.gao.gov/assets/120/119486.pdf 22 See R Steinbrook, “Science, politics, and federal advisory committees,” New England Journal of Medicine vol. 350, no. 14 (April 2004).23 See Beth Simone Noveck, Wiki Government: How Technology Can Make Government Better, Democracy Stronger, and Citizens More Powerful, (Washington D.C.: Brookings Institute Press, 2009), p. 131.25 See Carolyn Lukensmeyer, Joe Goldman and David Stern, “Assessing Public Participation in an Open Government Era: A Review of Federal Agency Plans,” IBM Center for The Business of Government Fostering Transparency and Democracy Series, 2011, http://americaspeaks.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Assessing-Public-Participation-in-an-Open-Government-Era.pdf 26 Mark H. Moore, Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in Government, (Boston: Harvard University Press, 1995), p.165.27 Michael P. Brown, Replacing Citizenship: AIDS Activism and Radical Democracy, (New York: The Guilford Press, 1997), 137.28 Josiah Ober, Democracy and Knowledge, (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2008), p. 32.29 Josiah Ober, Democracy and Knowledge, (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2008), p. 38.30 “How will we ever make sense of scientific topics that are too big to know? The short answer: by transforming what it means to know something scientifically.” David Weinberger, “To Know, but Not Understand: David Weinberger on Science and Big Data,” The Atlantic, January 3, 2012, http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/12/01/to-know-but-not-understand-david-weinberger-on-science-and-big-data/250820/#comment-400769949 
31 MG Siegler, “Eric Schmidt: Every 2 Days We Create As Much Information As We Did Up To 2003,” Tech Crunch, August 4, 2010, http://techcrunch.com/2010/08/04/schmidt-data/ 32 Greg Elin, “WTF is the Semantic Web?” Presented at Crisis Camp Ignite, 2009, http://www.slideshare.net/greg.elin.sunlight/wtf-is-the-semantic-web-ignite 33 “Thanks to the Web, amateurism and spuriousness no longer need look amateurish or spurious. If so-society’s susceptibility to misinformation is like AIDS then Web sites and Internet news groups and electronic bulletin boards – a vast, thrilling, promiscuous commingling of facts with fabrications—couldbe its bathhouses.” Kurt Andersen, “The Age of Unreason,” The New Yorker, February 3, 1997, http://www.kurtandersen.com/journalism/the-new-yorker/the-age-of-unreason/#sthash.opIbD2UE.dpuf 34 See J. M. Balkin, Cultural Software: A Theory of Ideology, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003).35 Clay Shirky, for one, insists that our filters are the problem, not the abundance of information. Clay Shirky, “It’s Not Information Overload. It’s Filter Failure,” Keynote at the Web 2.0 Expo NY, September 19, 2008, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LabqeJEOQyI; See also John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid, The Social Life of Information, (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2000).36 See “Jacques Bughin, Michael Chui and James Manyika, “Clouds, big data, and smart assets: Ten tech-enabled business trends to watch,” McKinsey Global Institute, September 22, 2010, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/in_the_news/clouds_big_data_and_smart_assets 37 “The Promise of Urban Informatics,” Center for Urban Science and Progress, May 30, 2013, http://cusp.nyu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/CUSP-overview-May-30-2013.pdf 